>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, MAY 7: FRANCE PICKS
A NEW PRESIDENT.
IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT:
CAMBODIAN REFUGEES DEPORTED BY
THE UNITED STATES TO A HOMELAND
THEY NEVER KNEW.
AND FORMER OBAMA DEPUTY
ATTORNEY GENERAL SALLY YATES SET
TO TESTIFY ABOUT MICHAEL FLYNN
NEXT ON "PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
EMMANUEL MACRON HAS WON ONE OF
THE MOST DIVISIVE AND
ACRIMONIOUS POLITICAL CAMPAIGNS
IN FRENCH HISTORY IN THE RUN-
OFF ELECTION FOR PRESIDENT
BETWEEN INDEPENDENT CENTRIST
EMMANUEL MACRON AND RIGHT-WING
POPULIST MARINE LE PEN.
PROJECTIONS GIVE MACRON WHAT
ANALYSTS ARE CALLING AN
"EMPHATIC" VICTORY OVER HIS
BITTER RIVAL, WINNING OVER 60
PERCENT OF THE VOTE.
MACRON, WHO WILL BECOME FRANCE'S
YOUNGEST PRESIDENT SINCE THE
OFFICE WAS ESTABLISHED ALMOST
170 YEARS AGO SPOKE TO
SUPPORTERS THIS EVENING:
>> (translated): AFTER A LONG
DEMOCRATIC CONFRONTATION, YOU'VE
DECIDED TO GRANT ME YOUR
CONFIDENCE AND I WANT TO EXPRESS
MY PROFOUND GRATITUDE.
IT'S A GREAT HONOR AND IT'S A
GREAT RESPONSIBILITY.
>> Sreenivasan: MARINE LE PEN
CONCEDED DEFEAT AND CALLED
MACRON TO CONGRATULATE HIM,
WISHING HIM SUCCESS IN DEALING
WITH THE MASSIVE CHALLENGES
FACING FRANCE.
IN A TWEET, PRESIDENT TRUMP ALSO
CONGRATULATED MACRON AND SAID HE
LOOKS FORWARD TO WORKING WITH
HIM.
THE CHOICE COULDN'T HAVE BEEN
MORE STARK TO SUCCEED SOCIALIST
FRANCOIS HOLLANDE BETWEEN THE
39-YEAR-OLD FORMER ECONOMY
MINISTER MACRON WHO WANTS TO
BOLSTER EUROPEAN INTEGRATION AND
WHO SUPPORTS IMMIGRATION, AND LE
PEN, WHO WANTS TO LEAVE THE E.U.
AND THE EURO CURRENCY AND CRACK
DOWN ON IMMIGRATION.
MACRON AND HIS WIFE CAST THEIR
BALLOTS TODAY IN THE TOWN OF LE
TOURQUET, WHILE LE PEN VOTED IN
A TOWN CONTROLLED BY HER
NATIONAL FRONT PARTY, HENIN-
BEAUMONT.
DESPITE THE HIGH STAKES,
ELECTION OFFICIALS SAY THE
TURNOUT WAS LOWER THAN THE
PREVIOUS SEVERAL PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTIONS.
BOTH CANDIDATES HAD THEIR
SUPPORTERS WITH VARYING DEGREES
OF ENTHUSIASM.
>> (translated): WE END UP
WITH TWO CANDIDATES FROM THE
OLIGARCHY.
I AM HAPPY WITH NEITHER OF THEM.
NEITHER OF THEM HAVE AN
INTERESTING PROGRAM FOR
TOMORROW'S WORLD.
>> (translated): I VOTED LE
PEN BECAUSE MACRON, WE DON'T
KNOW WHERE HE IS COMING FROM,
AND FRANCE WILL HAVE SERIOUS
PROBLEMS IF HE GETS AT THE HELM.
>> IT WASN'T EASY FOR ME TO VOTE
FOR MR. MACRON BECAUSE HE
REPRESENTS A KIND OF FINANCIAL
ELITE THAT I DON'T RECOGNIZE
MYSELF IN.
>> Sreenivasan: JOINING ME NOW
FROM PARIS AT THE MACRON
CAMPAIGN IS "NEWSHOUR WEEKEND"
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT MALCOLM
BRABANT.
MALCOLM, HOW MUCH OF A VICTORY
WAS THIS FOR HIM AS WE HEARD
FROM PEOPLE AT THE POLLS HERE?
SOME SAY IT WASN'T A VOTE FOR
HIM, IT WAS A VOTE AGAINST THE
OPPOSITION.
>> WELL, THIS IS -- IF YOU LOOK
AT THE NUMBERS, IT LOOKS LIKE A
REALLY SUBSTANTIAL VICTORY.
65 VERSUS 35%.
BUT THE REAL NUMBERS THAT
ACTUALLY VOTED FOR MACRON IT IS
NOT THAT BIG.
HE CANNOT REALLY REGARD THIS AS
BEING A COMPLETE MANDATE, A
POPULAR MANDATE BECAUSE THERE
WERE SO MANY PEOPLE WHO
ABSTAINED AND OVERALL THERE WERE
ONLY ABOUT 20 MILLION FRENCH
VOTERS WHO ACTUALLY VOTED FOR
HIM AND THAT'S LESS THAN A THIRD
OF THE COUNTRY.
MANY OF THE PEOPLE WHO VOTED FOR
HIM WEREN'T NECESSARILY VOTING
FOR HIM, THEY WERE VOTING
TACTICALLY.
WHAT THEY WANTED TO DO MORE THAN
ANYTHING ELSE IS MARINE LE PEN
FROM GETTING INTO THE PALACE.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE IS THE
DIFFICULTY OF GOVERNING NOW.
>> VERY MUCH SO.
THE PRESIDENT HAS THE ABILITY TO
APPOINT A PRIME MINISTER AND
VARIOUS OTHER MINISTERS.
BUT LIKE THE U.S. PRESIDENT HE
NEEDS TO HAVE THE FRENCH
PARLIAMENT WITH HIM AND FRENCH
PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS ARE
COMING UP IN JUNE AND HE HAS NOT
ANY REAL PARTY FORMATION OR
PARTY HISTORY.
HE HAS SOMEHOW GOT TO GET ABOUT
270 PEOPLE INTO PARLIAMENT IF
HE'S TO HAVE HIS MOVEMENT IN THE
MAJORITY THERE.
AND I THINK THAT WHAT WE ARE
REALLY GOING TO SEE IS NOT SO
THE OTHER PARTIES DOING THEIR
UTMOST TO TRY TO STYMIE HIM.
OR THE THE NEXT FOUR YEARS HE
MAY FIND IT VERY DIFFICULT TO
GET HIS POLICIES THROUGH
ESPECIALLY IF THE PARLIAMENT
DOESN'T SUPPORT IT.
>> Sreenivasan: ONE OF THE
ISSUES THAT WAS VERY CLEAR CUT,
BETWEEN THEIR RELATIONSHIP AND
WHAT THEY WOULD LIKE THE
RELATIONSHIP BE TO THE EU.
SHOULD THE EU TAKE SOME COMFORT
THAT LE PEN DID NOT WIN OR
SHOULD THEY BE CONCERNED THAT
MACRON DOES NOT HAVE THAT
MANDATE YET?
>> YOU KNOW WHAT, ANY
INDEPENDENT OBSERVER WOULD SAY
TO THE BUREAUCRATS IN BRUSSELS,
THERE ARE VERY MANY PEOPLE IN
EUROPE WHO ARE VERY UNHAPPY WITH
THE WAY THE E.U. IS RUN AND
THOSE ARE THE PEOPLE THAT NEED
TO BE LISTENED TO.
OTHERWISE THE RIGHT WING
NATIONALIST MOVEMENT IS GOING TO
CONTINUE.
WHAT POSSIBLY HAPPENED HERE
TONIGHT IS THIS MOVEMENT, THIS
WAVE WHICH LOTS OF PEOPLE WERE
HOPING WAS GOING TO SWEEP ACROSS
EUROPE SEEMS TO HAVE COME TO
ANOTHER DEAD HALT HERE ALTHOUGH
MARINE LE PEN SAYS SHE'S THE
HEAD OF A GREAT OPPOSITION.
THAT'S THE DESTINY OF THIS
SECTION IS IT'S GOING TO BE
DESTINY RATHER THAN GOVERNMENT.
>> THANKS SO MUCH.
>> YOU'RE VERY WELCOME.
>> Sreenivasan: TRUMP
ADMINISTRATION OFFICIALS AND
ALLIES DEFENDED THE HEALTH CARE
BILL PASSED NARROWLY LAST WEEK
BY THE HOUSE.
SPEAKER PAUL RYAN CALLED THE
BILL A, "RESCUE MISSION" FROM
THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT AND
DISMISSED CHARGES THAT
INDIVIDUALS WITH PRE-EXISTING
CONDITIONS WOULD BE LEFT BEHIND.
>> WE WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT
PEOPLE WHO HAVE BAD HEALTHCARE
STATUS WHO HAVE A PRE-EXISTING
CONDITION GET AFFORDABLE
COVERAGE AND THAT'S NOT
HAPPENING IN OBAMACARE.
YOU GOTTA REMEMBER IF YOU CAN'T
EVEN GET A HEALTH INSURANCE
PLAN, WHAT GOOD IS IT?
YOU DON'T HAVE HEALTH INSURANCE.
>> Sreenivasan: BUT OHIO
REPUBLICAN GOVERNOR JOHN KASICH
SAID THE PROPOSED EIGHT-BILLION
DOLLARS FOR A RISK POOL FOR
AMERICANS WITH PRE-EXISTING
CONDITIONS IS, "TOTALLY
INADEQUATE".
>> NOW I CAN TELL YOU WE CAN DO
WITH LESS RESOURCES BUT YOU
CAN'T DO IT OVERNIGHT AND YOU
CANNOT GIVE PEOPLE A THREE OR
FOUR-THOUSAND DOLLAR HEALTH
INSURANCE POLICY, YOU KNOW WHERE
THEY'RE GOING TO BE?
THEY'RE GOING TO BE LIVING IN
THE EMERGENCY ROOMS AGAIN.
>> Sreenivasan: HEALTH AND HUMAN
SERVICES SECRETARY TOM PRICE
INSISTED THAT CUTTING ALMOST
ONE BILLION DOLLARS FROM
MEDICAID WILL ACTUALLY GIVE
STATES MORE FLEXIBILITY TO
PROVIDE COVERAGE.
>> SO WHAT WE'RE FASHIONING IS A
SYSTEM THAT WOULD ALLOW THE
STATES TO TAILOR THEIR MEDICAID
PROGRAM TO THOSE SPECIFIC
INDIVIDUALS THEREBY SAVING
MONEY, YES, BUT ALSO MAKING IT
SO THEY HAVE A HIGHER LEVEL OF
CARE, HIGHER QUALITY OF CARE
THAN THEY CURRENTLY DO.
>> Sreenivasan: WITH THE BILL
NOW BEFORE THE SENATE, PRESIDENT
TRUMP TODAY PRESSURED REPUBLICAN
MEMBERS, TWEETING:
>> Sreenivasan: DEMOCRATIC
SENATOR DIANNE FEINSTEIN SAID
THAT SHE IS CONCERNED BY THE
LACK OF ANALYSIS OF THE BILL'S
COST AND COVERAGE BY THE NON-
PARTISAN CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET
OFFICE.
>> I'M REALLY VERY WORRIED THAT
IN OUR RUSH TO JUDGMENT, WE
CREATE A MAJOR HEALTHCARE
PROBLEM FOR PEOPLE AND WE LOSE A
LOT OF JOBS IN SO DOING AND WE
CREATE A WHOLE ATMOSPHERE OF
UNPREDICTABILITY.
>> Sreenivasan: ON QUESTIONS OF
RUSSIAN MEDDLING AND HACKING IN
THE U.S. PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION,
CONGRESSIONAL COMMITTEES ARE
PROBING TIES AND COMMUNICATIONS
BETWEEN TRUMP CAMPAIGN
OPERATIVES AND RUSSIA.
TOMORROW, FORMER DEPUTY AND
ACTING ATTORNEY GENERAL SALLY
YATES IS SCHEDULED TO TESTIFY IN
PUBLIC ABOUT WHAT SHE KNEW ABOUT
OUSTED NATIONAL SECURITY ADVISER
MICHAEL FLYNN, AS WELL HER
CONVERSATIONS WITH THE TRUMP
WHITE HOUSE ABOUT HIM."
ASSOCIATED PRESS" REPORTER ERIC
TUCKER IS COVERING THIS STORY
AND JOINS ME NOW FROM
WASHINGTON.
WHAT IS THE DISCREPANCIES LIKELY
TO BE?
>> SO WE ARE GOING TO HEAR SALLY
YATES DESCRIBE A CONVERSATION
SHE HAD IN JANUARY WITH THE
WHITE HOUSE COUNSEL AND SHE'S
LIKELY TO SAY THAT SHE WARNED
THE WHITE HOUSE THAT THERE IS A
MAJOR DISCREPANCIES BETWEEN WHAT
THEY WERE SAYING PUBLICLY ABOUT
MICHAEL FLYNN'S CONVERSATIONS
WITH SERGEI KISLYAK, WHO WAS THE
RUSSIAN AMBASSADOR AND WHAT HE
SAID HE SAID.
IN SALLY YATES IN PARTICULAR IT
WAS ENOUGH TO LEAVE MICHAEL
FLYNN IN A COMPROMISED POSITION.
>> Sreenivasan: THAT'S A
DIFFERENT NARRATIVE FROM WHAT
THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION IS
INITIALLY SAYING ABOUT THIS.
>> YES, THE ADMINISTRATION SAID
YES INDEED SALLY YEATS CAME TO
US IN JANUARY TO LET US KNOW
THAT THERE WAS A DISCREPANCIES
BUT WHAT WE EXPECT, WE EXPECT
SALLY YATES TO TESTIFY THAT THIS
SEASONALITY JUST A HEADS UP BUT
THIS WAS AN ALARM AND WARNING
THAT YOU GUYS KEEP SAYING BASED
ON WHAT MICHAEL FLYNN IS TELLING
YOU, HE DIDN'T DISCUSS
SANCTIONS WITH MR. KISLYAK.
>> Sreenivasan: TO THE POINT
WHERE THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
WAS NOT ACTUALLY GIVING
INFORMATION TO THE INCOMING
TRUMP ADMINISTRATION BECAUSE
THEY DIDN'T TRUST THAT THIS
INFORMATION WASN'T GOING TO GET
PACK TO THE RUSSIANS.
>> THAT'S CORRECT.
MY COLLEAGUE WROTE A BIG PIECE
ON FRIDAY SUGGESTING THESE
ALARMS THAT WERE SURFACING
WITHIN THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
BASED ON QUESTIONS AND
INFORMATION THAT THE TRUMP
TRANSITION TEAM THAT WAS ASKING
PARTICULARLY AS IT RELATED TO
SERGEI KISLYAK, YOU ARE ALREADY
SEEING THIS AREA OF MISTRUST TO
DEVELOP.
>> WHO IS ABOUT TO BE CALLED UP
TO REBUT THE TESTIMONY THAT
SALLY YATES WILL GIVE TOMORROW?
>> TO POINT OUT BACK IN FEBRUARY
THE CONVERSATIONS THAT OCCURRED
WERE REINCE PRIEBUS AND SEAN
SPICER, THEY WERE OUT THERE
CHARACTERIZING THE
CONVERSATIONS.
WE'LL SEE TOMORROW.
THE ACTUAL JANUARY 25th
CONVERSATION SALLY YATES HAD
INVOLVED DON McGANN, IT'S NOT
CERTAIN WHAT HE WILL HAVE TO SAY
IN RESPONSE.
>> Sreenivasan: CLAPPER IN
MARCH SAID I HAVEN'T SEEN ANY
EVIDENCE OF ANY COLLUSION.
>> THAT'S RIGHT, REPUBLICANS
SEEM TO SEIZE ON THAT STATEMENT
AS SOME SORT OF VINDICATION.
HOWEVER, CLAPPER AT THE TIME DID
HAVE A SORT OF IMPORTANT CAVEAT
WHEN HE SAID, AT THE TIME I LEFT
THE ADMINISTRATION WHICH WOULD
HAVE BEEN JANUARY, AND WHEN WE
KNOW FROM FBI DIRECTOR JIM COMEY
THIS WEEK, THIS INVESTIGATION IS
ONGOING, NEW INTELLIGENCE IS
BEING REVIEWED, NEW INFORMATION
IS BEING PROCESSED AND ASSESSED
SO IT IS NOT CLEAR HOW
SIGNIFICANT IT IS IF IN JANUARY
NO CONCLUSION EXISTED.
THAT DOESN'T NECESSARILY, NOT
DISPOSITIVE OF ANYTHING
NECESSARILY.
>> Sreenivasan: SALLY YATES
TESTIMONY BEGINS TOMORROW AT
2:00, YOU CAN EXPECT IT TO BE
COVERED, THANKS ERIC.
>> THANK YOU FOR HAVING ME.
>> Sreenivasan: EVERY YEAR, THE
U.S. DEPORTS THOUSANDS OF
DOCUMENTED IMMIGRANTS AFTER THEY
COMPLETE PRISON TERMS FOR
CERTAIN FELONIES.
THE POLICY APPLIES TO LEGAL
PERMANENT RESIDENTS-- GREEN CARD
HOLDERS-- FROM JUST ABOUT ANY
COUNTRY, INCLUDING THOSE GRANTED
ASYLUM AS REFUGEES.
THE POLICY DATES BACK TO THE
CLINTON ADMINISTRATION.
ENFORCEMENT WAS STEPPED UP BY
THE BUSH ADMINISTRATION
FOLLOWING 9/11 AND CONTINUED BY
THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION.
IT REMAINS IN EFFECT TODAY.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,"
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND" SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT KIRA KAY REPORTS
FROM CAMBODIA ON A TIGHT-KNIT
COMMUNITY OF WAR REFUGEES TURNED
U.S. DEPORTEES, FIGHTING TO
CHANGE THE POLICY.
>> Reporter: WHEN CHALLY DANG
WAS GROWING UP IN PHILADELPHIA,
HE DREAMED OF PLAYING
PROFESSIONAL BASKETBALL.
>> WE'D JUST SHOOT HOOPS AND
DREAM OF ONE DAY MAKING IT BIG
IN THE NBA.
SO IT'S PART OF BEING AMERICAN.
>> Reporter: BUT AMERICA IS JUST
A MEMORY FOR DANG.
HE PLAYS HIS SUNDAY PICK-UP GAME
NINE-THOUSAND MILES FROM
PHILADELPHIA, IN PHNOM PENH, THE
CAPITAL OF CAMBODIA, WHERE HIS
PARENTS WERE BORN.
>> Reporter: DANG IS NOT HERE BY
CHOICE.
HE GREW UP IN THE U.S. AS A
LEGAL PERMANENT RESIDENT, A
CHILD OF WAR REFUGEES.
BUT IN 2011, HE WAS DEPORTED TO
A COUNTRY HE NEVER KNEW.
>> EVERYTHING WAS DIFFERENT, IT
WAS LIKE A CULTURE SHOCK.
THE ENVIRONMENT IS DIFFERENT,
THE PEOPLE ARE DIFFERENT, THE
LANGUAGE IS DIFFERENT.
>> Reporter: HIS CRIME WAS
FIRING A GUN IN THE AIR DURING A
GANG STANDOFF WHEN HE WAS 15-
YEARS-OLD.
HE SERVED FIVE YEARS, AND UPON
RELEASE, THE GOVERNMENT ORDERED
HIM DEPORTED, BUT DIDN'T ACT ON
IT.
HE GOT A JOB AND HAD FIVE KIDS.
BUT DEPORTATION ORDERS NEVER
EXPIRE, AND EIGHT YEARS LATER,
WHEN DANG WENT FOR A ROUTINE
IMMIGRATION CHECK-IN, HE WAS
DETAINED AND PUT ON A PLANE TO
CAMBODIA.
HE SAYS THERE'S A STIGMA TO
BEING A DEPORTEE.
>> WE ARE IN OUR OWN CATEGORY,
BECAUSE THE CAMBODIAN COMMUNITY
LOOK AT US AS FOREIGNERS WHO
DECIDED TO COME BACK, AND THOSE
THAT KNOW WE WERE DEPORTED LOOK
AT US LIKE WE ARE CRIMINALS THAT
GOT REJECTED FROM ANOTHER
COUNTRY SO WHY ARE WE BACK IN
CAMBODIA?
>> Reporter: DANG IS ONE OF 550
DEPORTEES FROM AMERICA NOW
LIVING IN CAMBODIA.
THEY BEGAN ARRIVING IN 2002,
WHEN THIS COUNTRY SIGNED A
REPATRIATION AGREEMENT WITH THE
U.S. TO ACCEPT GREEN CARD
HOLDERS OF CAMBODIAN DESCENT WHO
HAD COMMITTED AGGRAVATED
FELONIES, EVEN NONVIOLENT
OFFENSES THAT CARRIED SHORT
SENTENCES.
THE "COOL LOUNGE," A BAR RUN BY
DEPORTEES, IS HOME AWAY FROM
HOME FOR THESE PEOPLE WHO WENT
TO AMERICAN SCHOOLS, LISTENED TO
AMERICAN MUSIC, ATE AMERICAN
FOOD.
>> Reporter: CHANDARA TEP IS
FROM MODESTO, CALIFORNIA.
>> I GREW UP 4TH OF JULY, YOU
KNOW, FIREWORKS, BBQ, SPRING
BREAKS.
I SHED TEARS WHEN 9/11 HAPPENED,
BECAUSE I FELT LIKE I WAS
AMERICAN TOO.
>> Reporter: TEP WAS DEPORTED
SIX YEARS AGO, FOLLOWING HIS
CONVICTION FOR ASSAULTING A
POLICE OFFICER.
SOPHEA PHEA AND BOBBY ORN ALSO
ARRIVED IN 2011, KALVIN HENG, IN
2004.
HENG AND PHEA WEREN'T BORN IN
CAMBODIA.
LIKE MANY DEPORTEES THEY WERE
BORN IN REFUGEE CAMPS IN
THAILAND, AFTER THEIR PARENTS
FLED WAR AND THE GENOCIDAL KHMER
ROUGE REGIME THAT RULED CAMBODIA
IN THE 1970S AND KILLED TWO-
MILLION PEOPLE.
THE AMERICAN BOMBING OF CAMBODIA
DURING ITS WAR IN VIETNAM ADDED
TO THE CHAOS.
THE U.S. EVENTUALLY GRANTED
ASYLUM TO 150-THOUSAND CAMBODIAN
REFUGEES BETWEEN 1975 AND 1994.
>> YOU COME FROM A JUNGLE TO A
CONCRETE JUNGLE.
YOU ARE OVER HERE IN CAMBODIA,
YOU KNOW, YOU DODGING BULLETS.
OVER THERE YOU'RE LIVING IN THE
PROJECT, YOU'RE DODGING MUGGERS
AND ROBBERS AND THIEVES.
>> IN THE STATES, BEING IN BAD
NEIGHBORHOODS, SOMETIMES WE MAKE
MISTAKES, AND SOMETIMES WE GO ON
A WRONG PATH, AND NOT KNOWING
WHAT THE BIGGER CONSEQUENCES
ARE.
>> Reporter: THESE CHILDREN OF
REFUGEES SAY THEY HAD NO IDEA
THEIR BRUSHES WITH THE LAW MADE
THEM VULNERABLE TO DEPORTATION.
KALVIN HENG SAYS HE DIDN'T FIGHT
HIS ASSAULT WITH A DEADLY WEAPON
CHARGE AND ACCEPTED A ONE-YEAR
SENTENCE, NOT KNOWING THAT MADE
HIM DEPORTABLE.
>> WE WEREN'T INFORMED ABOUT
TAKING A PLEA BARGAIN, OR
ANYTHING LIKE THAT.
IF WE TAKE A PLEA BARGAIN WE
COULD BE, YOU KNOW WE COULD FACE
DEPORTATION, AND SO ON AND SO
ON.
WE DIDN'T KNOW ANY OF THAT UNTIL
LIKE NOW, WHEN WE STARTED DOING
OUR RESEARCH.
>> Reporter: AMERICAN
IMMIGRATION JUDGES HAVE NO
LEEWAY TO CONSIDER HOW POTENTIAL
DEPORTEES HAVE REHABILITATED
THEIR LIVES.
TEP HAD BEEN OUT OF PRISON FOR
13 YEARS WHEN HE WAS DEPORTED,
LEAVING A WIFE AND THREE KIDS
BEHIND.
>> WE CHANGED OUR LIVES.
WE HAD FAMILIES, YOU KNOW.
WE BOUGHT A HOME, YOU KNOW, WE
DID ALL THAT STUFF ALREADY, AND
THEN KNOCK-KNOCK, YOU KNOW,
"YOU'VE GOT TO GO, BECAUSE
YOU'RE NOT A CITIZEN."
>> Reporter: BY THE TIME THEY
LAND IN CAMBODIA, DEPORTEES HAVE
BEEN STRIPPED OF ALL AMERICAN
IDENTIFICATION.
CAMBODIAN IMMIGRATION OFFICIALS
GIVE THEM A SINGLE DOCUMENT WITH
THEIR NAME, BIRTH DATE, AND
PHOTO.
THEIR LIVES START OVER FROM
SCRATCH.
>> I HAD NO LUGGAGE.
I HAD ABOUT $150 IN MY POCKET.
NO POSSESSIONS AT ALL.
>> EVERYTHING'S IN CAMBODIAN AND
YOU DON'T EVEN KNOW HOW TO WRITE
YOUR NAME IN CAMBODIAN.
>> Reporter: LOCAL OFFICIALS
WOULDN'T EVEN RECOGNIZE HENG'S
IMMIGRATION DOCUMENT.
SO HE GOT CREATIVE.
>> MY UNCLE HAD TO PLAY MY DAD.
AND THEN I HAD TO BE PUT INTO
HIS FAMILY BOOK AND USE THE
IDENTITY OF MY COUSIN THAT
PASSED AWAY THE YEAR BEFORE I
CAME.
SO I WAS UNDER A WHOLE NEW
IDENTITY FOR 12, 13 YEARS.
>> Reporter: WHAT DO YOU SAY TO
THE COMMENT THAT I'M SURE YOU
GUYS GET A LOT, "TOUGH LUCK, YOU
GUYS HAD AN OPPORTUNITY IN THE
STATES, YOU BLEW IT?"
>> WHAT I SAY?
MY ANSWER'S ALWAYS LIKE THIS:
YES, I MESSED UP, I CONFESS TO
IT, YOU KNOW WHAT I MEAN, BUT
YOU ARE NOT SEEING WHERE WE'RE
COMING FROM, YOU KNOW, WE'RE
REFUGEES OF THE WAR AND I LOST
MY RIGHTS, OF COURSE, BECAUSE
I'M NOT A CITIZEN.
BUT MY KIDS HAS RIGHTS, MY MOM
HAS RIGHTS, A RIGHT TO BE A
FAMILY MEMBER, A RIGHT TO BE
WITH ONE ANOTHER, YOU KNOW WHAT
I MEAN.
>> I DO BELIEVE THAT YOU DO THE
CRIME YOU DO THE TIME, AND YOU
KNOW FOR MOST OF US, OR ALL OF
US, WE'VE DONE OUR TIME.
>> THESE ARE NOT ILLEGAL
IMMIGRANTS.
THEY DIDN'T SNEAK INTO THE U.S.
>> Reporter: AMERICAN BILL HEROD
WAS LIVING IN CAMBODIA WHEN THE
DEPORTEES BEGAN ARRIVING IN
2002.
HE SAYS BACK IN THE U.S.,
OFFICIALS HAD LEFT REFUGEES TO
FEND FOR THEMSELVES.
>> BECAUSE OF THE FAILURE OF THE
REFUGEE RESETTLEMENT PROGRAM, NO
CASE OFFICER CAME AROUND AND
KNOCKED ON THE DOOR AND SAID,
"YOU NEED TO FILL OUT THESE
PAPERS TO GET CITIZENSHIP."
>> Reporter: HEROD'S CHARITY,
THE "RETURNEE INTEGRATION
SUPPORT CENTER," OR "RISC," IS
STAFFED BY DEPORTEES AND HELPS
NEWCOMERS THROUGH THE DIFFICULT
ADJUSTMENT.
>> THEY ACTUALLY LIVE HERE IN
THIS BUILDING IF THEY DON'T HAVE
ANY PLACE ELSE TO GO, OR WE PAY
TO PUT THEM IN A GUEST HOUSE.
AND JUST HELP THEM GET ON THEIR
FEET.
AND THEN WE FIND OUT WHAT THEIR
INTERESTS ARE, WHAT THEIR WORK
EXPERIENCE IS, AND TRY TO HELP
THEM FIND JOBS.
>> Reporter: RISC HAS HELPED 50
AMERICAN DEPORTEES TRAIN FOR AND
OBTAIN JOBS TEACHING ENGLISH AND
KEEPS TABS ON THEM AS THEY
ASSIMILATE INTO CAMBODIAN
SOCIETY.
DESPITE MANY SUCCESS STORIES,
SOME DEPORTEES SUCCUMB TO DRUG
USE, MENTAL HEALTH PROBLEMS, AND
CRIME.
HEROD LOST AN EYE WHEN GRABBING
DRANO OUT OF THE HANDS OF A
DESPONDENT DEPORTEE.
>> AND SOME DON'T MAKE IT.
WE'VE HAD SUICIDES.
AND IT'S HEARTBREAKING WHEN WE
REALIZE THAT MAYBE IF WE'D MADE
ANOTHER FIELD VISIT OR ANOTHER
PHONE CALL OR TAKEN HIM OUT FOR
PIZZA ONE MORE TIME, WE MIGHT
HAVE BEEN ABLE TO HELP THEM GET
ACROSS THAT BLOCKAGE.
>> Reporter: DEPORTEES STRUGGLE
WITH WHETHER OR NOT TO REVEAL
THEIR CRIMINAL RECORDS.
HENG WORKS AS AN ADVERTISING
MANAGER AT A LOCAL ENGLISH-
LANGUAGE NEWSPAPER AND WAS
CANDID WITH HIS EMPLOYER.
>> I'VE MADE A MISTAKE IN THE
PAST.
I'VE DID MY TIME FOR IT.
I'VE REHABILITATED.
SO PLEASE DON'T LOOK AT WHAT
I'VE DONE IN THE PAST AFFECT
WHAT I CAN CONTRIBUTE.
AND THEY'VE BEEN VERY GOOD TO ME
ABOUT IT.
>> Reporter: BUT PHEA, WHO WAS
DEPORTED FOR CREDIT CARD FRAUD,
NEEDED THREE YEARS TO OPEN UP TO
OTHERS ABOUT HER PAST.
>> I WAS LONELY.
I WAS DEPRESSED, I KIND OF WAS
LOST.
>> Reporter: SHE NOW TEACHES
CAMBODIAN CHILDREN IN A PHNOM
PENH SCHOOL, BUT SHE ISN'T
RAISING HER OWN 13-YEAR-OLD SON,
WHO REMAINS IN CALIFORNIA WITH
HIS FATHER.
>> I'M ANGRY THAT THIS HAS
FRACTURED MY RELATIONSHIP WITH
MY SON.
WE DON'T HAVE THAT COMMUNICATION
ANYMORE.
I DON'T KNOW IF HE'S GOING TO
TURN OUT TO BE ANGRY AT ME OR
JUST HOLDING GRUDGES AGAINST ME
OR JUST FEELING LONELY THAT I'M
NOT THERE.
>> Reporter: HE VISITED HER LAST
YEAR FOR THE FIRST TIME. SHE
HOPES IT WON'T BE THE LAST.
>> AND HE DIDN'T KNOW HOW TO
CALL ME "MOM" ANYMORE, AND THAT
HURTS.
>> IN THE U.S., DEPORTEE
FAMILIES AND CAMBODIAN-AMERICAN
COMMUNITY LEADERS HAVE LOBBIED
AMERICAN OFFICIALS FOR CHANGES
IN IMMIGRATION POLICY WITH FEW
RESULTS.
LAST YEAR, KALVIN HENG HAD A
REALIZATION.
>> I JUST BLURTED IT OUT, YOU
KNOW, "LET'S TAKE IT TO THE
CAMBODIAN GOVERNMENT."
>> HENG RECRUITED HIS DEPORTEE
FRIENDS AND FORMED A POLITICAL
ACTION GROUP, "ONE LOVE
CAMBODIA."
THEY ARE PUSHING TO AMEND THE
REPATRIATION AGREEMENT FROM THE
CAMBODIAN SIDE.
MOST CRUCIALLY, THEY WANT THE
CAMBODIAN GOVERNMENT TO REFUSE
TO ACCEPT ANYONE WHO WAS ONCE A
REFUGEE.
TO THEIR SURPRISE, THIS GROUP OF
EX-CONVICTS WAS GRANTED A
MEETING WITH HIGH LEVEL
OFFICIALS AT CAMBODIA'S INTERIOR
MINISTRY.
>> THEY SAT THERE AND LISTENED
TO EACH OF OUR STORIES AND
SEEING WHAT WE STRUGGLE HERE.
>> NO ONE HAD GONE UP TO THEM
AND OFFICIALLY FILED FOR A
GRIEVANCE AND, YOU KNOW, REALLY
LET THEM KNOW THAT YOU KNOW THIS
IS REALLY, REALLY MESSING UP OUR
COMMUNITIES AND OUR FAMILIES
ACROSS THE U.S.
>> Reporter: ONLY DAYS AFTER
THAT MEETING, THE CAMBODIAN
GOVERNMENT SENT A LETTER TO THE
AMERICAN EMBASSY, REQUESTING TO
AMEND THE CURRENT REPATRIATION
AGREEMENT AND "SUSPEND
TEMPORARILY THE IMPLEMENTATION"
UNTIL A NEW DEAL IS STRUCK.
THE U.S. REJECTED CAMBODIA'S
REQUEST TO SUSPEND DEPORTATIONS
AND HAS SOMETIMES WITHHELD VISAS
AND ECONOMIC AID FROM COUNTRIES
THAT REFUSE TO ACCEPT DEPORTEES.
U.S. OFFICIALS HAVE AGREED TO A
FIRST DISCUSSION WITH CAMBODIA,
EXPECTED TO TAKE PLACE SOON.
>> Reporter: JUST TEN DAYS AGO,
CAMBODIA'S PRIME MINISTER
PUBLICLY DEMANDED TO RENEGOTIATE
THE AGREEMENT, CALLING THE
DEPORTATIONS "A SAD SEPARATION"
OF FAMILIES.
>> NOBODY EVER STEPPED UP TO
THEM AND TOLD THEM THIS IS
WHAT'S HAPPENING.
>> Reporter: THE "ONE LOVE
CAMBODIA" TEAM IS ASSISTING THE
CAMBODIAN GOVERNMENT IN
PREPARATION FOR THE TALKS--
TALKS THEY HOPE WILL YIELD
CHANGES THAT MIGHT COME TOO LATE
FOR THEM, BUT COULD STOP OTHERS
FROM FOLLOWING IN THEIR
FOOTSTEPS.
>> THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND
SUNDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: THE 82 KIDNAPPED
NIGERIAN SCHOOLGIRLS FREED
YESTERDAY BY BOKO HARAM ISLAMIC
MILITANTS ARRIVED IN NIGERIA'S
CAPITAL TODAY TO MEET WITH
PRESIDENT MUHAMMADU BUHARI, AS
THEIR FAMILIES LOOKED FORWARD TO
BEING REUNITED.
THE GOVERNMENT SAID TODAY THE
GIRLS WERE RELEASED IN EXCHANGE
FOR FIVE CAPTURED BOKO HARAM
LEADERS.
THE FREED GIRLS WERE AMONG 276
GIRLS KIDNAPPED FROM THEIR
SCHOOL IN CHIBOK MORE THAN
THREE YEARS AGO.
MORE THAN 100 OF THE KIDNAPED
GIRLS REMAIN IN BOKO HARAM
CAPTIVITY.
ATTEMPTS BY MIGRANTS AND
REFUGEES TO REACH EUROPE ARE
ACCELERATING AS THE WEATHER
IMPROVES.
MORE THAN FOUR-THOUSAND WERE
RESCUED IN THE MEDITERRANEAN
OVER THE WEEKEND.
A SPANISH AID GROUP SAID TODAY
ONE OF ITS SHIPS PICKED UP MORE
THAN FIVE-HUNDRED MIGRANTS FROM
SYRIA AND SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA.
THE GROUP SAID THE MIGRANTS HAD
DEPARTED FROM LIBYA.
A SPANISH WARSHIP PICKED UP MORE
THAN 650 MIGRANTS OFF LIBYA
YESTERDAY.
ALSO YESTERDAY, THE ITALIAN
COAST GUARD AND NAVY AND OTHER
GROUPS RESCUED THREE-THOUSAND
MIGRANTS IN THE MEDITERRANEAN
SEA IN MORE THAN 20 SEPARATE
OPERATIONS.
THE INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION
FOR MIGRATION REPORTS THAT
ALMOST 44-THOUSAND REFUGEES AND
MIGRANTS HAVE ARRIVED IN EUROPE
BY SEA SO FAR THIS YEAR.
NORTH KOREA SAID TODAY IT HAS
DETAINED YET ANOTHER U.S.
CITIZEN, THE FOURTH THE COUNTRY
IS NOW HOLDING.
THE OFFICIAL NEWS AGENCY SAID
KIM HAK SONG WAS DETAINED
YESTERDAY ON SUSPICION OF WHAT
IT CALLED "ACTS AGAINST THE
STATE."
HE WORKED AT THE SAME PYONGYANG
UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY WHERE THE THIRD U.S.
CITIZEN WAS DETAINED LAST MONTH.
THE UNIVERSITY WAS FOUNDED BY
EVANGELICAL CHRISTIANS IN 2010.
CALIFORNIA IS LEADING THE NATION
WITH THE HIGHEST PERCENTAGE OF
STATE AND FEDERAL PRISONERS
SERVING LIFE SENTENCES.
FIND OUT WHY AT pbs.org/newshour
FINALLY, RETURNING TO OUR TOP
STORY, 39-YEAR-OLD CENTRIST
EMMANUEL MACRON HAS BEEN ELECTED
FRANCE'S NEXT AND YOUNGEST
PRESIDENT, WINNING A DECISIVE
VICTORY OVER FAR-RIGHT POPULIST
MARINE LE PEN IN TODAY'S RUN-OFF
ELECTION.
AND IN BOSTON, FORMER PRESIDENT
BARACK OBAMA IS BEING HONORED
TONIGHT WITH THE KENNEDY
FOUNDATION'S ANNUAL "PROFILE IN
COURAGE" AWARD, PRESENTED BY
PRESIDENT KENNEDY'S DAUGHTER
CAROLINE.
AND IN HANNOVER, GERMANY, 50,000
EVACUATED RESIDENTS WERE
ALLOWED BACK IN THEIR HOMES
THIS EVENING AFTER EXPERTS
DEFUSED THREE BRITISH BOMBS
DROPPED ON THE CITY DURING WORLD
WAR II.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
"PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.